# Fabrication and characterization of magnesium and calcium trimesate complexes via ion-exchange and one-pot self-assembly reaction

## Abstract
Using two different synthesis methods, two diversified magnesium and calcium complexes were successfully prepared. When the ion exchange method was used, C9H14MgO11.H2O and C18H30Ca3O24 complexes were obtained. When the one-pot self-assembly reaction was used, C18H34Mg3O26.4H2O and C9H12CaO10 complexes were produced. The structural characterizations were performed by using X-ray diffraction, FT-IR and elemental analyses. Thermal behavior of complexes were also determined via TGA method. The both complexes of magnesium and calcium trimesate have micro and mesoporosity with low porosity because of hydrogen bonds. Then hydrogen storage capacities of complexes were also determined. The differences in synthesis method result in the differences on complexes structure, morphology (shape, particle size and specific surface area) and hydrogen storage capacities. Image 1

## Introduction

Metal-organic frameworks are formed by combination of metal ions and organic ligands, creating a new subject between coordination chemistry and material science [1]. Because of the high porosity and high surface area [2], metal-organic frameworks (also known as porous coordination polymers) have important applications such as gas storage [3], purification [4], separation [5], ion exchange [6], heterogeneous catalyst [7], optic [8], drug delivery [9], chemical sensor [10] and fabrication of nanoparticles [11]. Besides the variety of surface pore size and shape, metal enclosures are expanding their usage areas by increasing their activities. The crystal form, surface properties and pore sizes of the metal-organic frameworks are influenced by the synthesis temperature and time [12], pressure, solvent type and amount [13], the proportions of starting materials, the pH of the medium [14]. Different synthesis methods are used in the synthesis of such structures. It is very important to select the appropriate synthesis method to prevent by-product formation and to provide the nucleation and growth conditions required for crystallization. Among the synthesis methods, solvothermal method [15], hydrothermal synthesis [16], microwave method [17,18], electrochemical synthesis [19] and mechanochemical method [20] are the most used methods.

Metal organic frameworks reported in the literature involved transition metals; however, a few studies described the use of light elements (magnesium and calcium) [21]. Magnesium and calcium elements are the most abundant elements on the planet; they are cheap, nontoxic, and essential in many biological processes. Magnesium and calcium based metal organic frameworks have received increasing research attention owing to their important roles in biological processes and drug delivery systems [22]. Due to low atomic mass, light elements are good candidate metal ions as hydrogen storage materials [23]. Mazaj et al. were synthesized four new magnesium trimesate by using hydrothermal (C18H18O16Mg) and solvothermal (C18H30O24Mg3; C9H16O13Mg2; C18H6O12Mg3) method [24]. They investigated the solvent effect on the formation of crystal structures. Calderone et al. were synthesized three new magnesium trimesate Mg(HBTC)(DMF)2[(CH3)2NH], Mg3(BTC)(HCOO)3(DMF)3 and Mg3(BTC)2(DMF)4 from identical reaction mixtures by varying synthetic temperature by using hydrothermal method [25]. Yang et al. were synthesized two-dimensional layer structure calcium trimesate (C18H30Ca3O24) using calcium acetate in isopropanol [26], Srinivasan et al. were synthesized same complex using calcium carbonate [27] and Vakiti et al. were used calcium chloride as a calcium source for same complex via solution method [28].

In the present paper, we reported magnesium and calcium trimesate complexes prepared by one-pot self-assembly reaction and ion exchange method. The complexes were characterized by FT-IR, elemental analyses, ICP-MS and single crystal XRD measurements. The thermal decomposition characteristics of the complexes were investigated. At the second step, surface areas of complexes were calculated and hydrogen adsorption measurements were performed. The effects of synthesis methods were also compared for magnesium and calcium trimesate complexes.

## Materials and methods

All the reagents were analytical grade and were used as commercially obtained without further purification. Sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3) (Merck, % 99.5), trimesic acid (C9H6O6) (Aldrich, % 95), magnesium acetate Mg(CH3COO)2 (Aldrich, % 98), magnesium nitrate Mg(NO3)2.6H2O (Aldrich, % 98), calcium acetate Ca(CH3COO)2 (Sigma, % 99), calcium nitrate Ca(NO3)2.6H2O (Sigma, % 99) and ethanol (C2H5OH) (Sigma, % 99.8) were used.

C, H contents were determined by CHNS-932 LECO model elemental analysis instrument. Mg, Ca contents were determined by Perkin Elmer DRC II model ICP-MS instrument. Thermal behavior of complexes were performed by Shimadzu DTG-60H system. FT-IR spectra were recorded in 4000–400 cm−1 range with Perkin-Elmer Spectrum One instrument by KBr pellet technique. Surface area measurements and hydrogen storage capacity were recorded by Quantachrome Autosorb IQ.

Suitable crystal was selected for data collection which was performed on a D8-QUEST diffractometer equipped with a graphite-monochromatic Mo-Kα radiation at 296 K. The structures were solved by direct methods using SHELXS-97 and refined by full-matrix least-squares methods on F2 using SHELXL-97 [29] from within the WINGX [30] suite of software. All non-hydrogen atoms were refined with anisotropic parameters. The H atoms of C atoms were located from different maps and then treated as riding atoms with CH distances of 0.93 Å. All other H atoms were located in a difference map refined subject to a DFIX restraint. Molecular diagrams were created using MERCURY [31]. Supramolecular analyses were made and the diagrams were prepared with the aid of PLATON [32].

## Synthesis of magnesium and calcium trimesate complexes by one-pot self-assembly reaction

2 mmol of trimesic acid were dissolved in 20 mL deionized water. 3 mmol of metal acetate (calcium or magnesium) were added to form the metal salt of trimesic acid and acetic acid. The mixture was stirred at 150 °C until the acetic acid completely evaporated. 20 mL ethanol were added to crystallizing solution. White crystals of magnesium trimesate were obtained from the crystallizing solution 22 days later and white crystals of calcium trimesate were obtained from solution 12 days later.

## Synthesis of magnesium and calcium trimesate complexes by ion exchange method

1 mmol of trimesic acid was dissolved in 20 mL of deionized water. 3 mmol of sodium bicarbonate were added to form sodium salt of the trimesic acid. The resulting solution was mixed with 3 mmol of metal nitrate (magnesium and calcium) and stirred at 70 °C until all reactants dissolved. 20 mL ethanol were added to crystallizing solution. White crystals of magnesium trimesate were obtained after 10 days and white crystals of calcium trimesate were obtained after 5 days.

## Results and discussion

## SC-X-ray diffraction analysis

The molecular formula of the magnesium trimesate synthesized by the one-pot self-assembly reaction structurally analyzed by the single crystal method is found as C9H14MgO11.H2O. The molecular weight is 340.53 g/mol. The asymmetric unit contains a magnesium atom, a trimesic acid ligand, five coordinated crystal water and a noncoordinated hydrate water molecule (Fig. 1 ). The Mg atom forms a distorted octahedral geometry that is coordinated with two oxygen atoms from two different trimesic acid ligands and four oxygen atoms from water molecules. Molecules are linked to each other with the intermolecular hydrogen bonds formed by the water molecules. The incorporation of intermolecular hydrogen bonds results in a three-dimensional supramolecular network structure (Fig. S1). The molecular formula of the magnesium trimesate synthesized by the ion exchange method is found as C18H34Mg3O26.4H2O. The molecular weight is 811.44 g/mol. The asymmetric unit consists of three Mg (II) ions, two trimesic acid ligands, fourteen coordinated crystal water molecules and four noncoordinated hydrate water molecules (Fig. 1). The Mg2 atom is coordinated with the two oxygen atoms coming from two different trimesic acid ligands and the four oxygen atoms from the aqua ligands while the Mg1 and Mg3 atoms coordinate with the oxygen atoms from the trimesic acid ligands and the five oxygen atoms from the aqua ligands. Thus, all Mg (II) ions form distorted octahedral geometry. Mg-Owater bond lengths vary between 2.030 (6) and 2.153 (6) Å, while Mg-Ocarboxyl bond lengths vary between 2.011 (5) and 2.050 (6) Å. The incorporation of intermolecular hydrogen bonds results in a three-dimensional supramolecular network structure (Fig. S2).

The molecular formula of the calcium trimesate synthesized by one-pot self-assembly reaction is found as C9H12CaO10. The molecular weight is 320.27 g/mol. The asymmetric unit contains a Ca (II) ion, a trimesic acid ligand and four coordinated water molecules (Fig. 2 ). The Ca1 atom is coordinated to three oxygen atoms coming from three different trimesic acid ligands and four oxygen atoms coming from the water molecule. Trimesic acid ligand has μ2-bridge coordination mode. The distances between neighboring Ca (II) ions are 5.991 Å, 9.632 Å and 11.280 Å. Two-dimensional coordination polymers are formed by binding of adjacent Ca (II) ions with trimesic acid ligands. Ca-Owater bond lengths vary between 2.3623 (10) and 2.4778 (11) Å, while Ca-Ocarboxyl bond lengths vary between 2.3214 (9) and 2.4666 (10) Å. The OH⋯O hydrogen bonds provide molecular packing. Intermolecular OH⋯O hydrogen bonds linking adjacent two-dimensional coordination polymers contribute to the formation of a three-dimensional supramolecular structure (Fig. S3). The molecular formula of the calcium trimesate synthesized by the ion exchange method is found as C18H30Ca3O24. The molecular weight is 750.66 g/mol. The asymmetric unit contains two calcium ions, one trimesic acid ligand and six coordinated aqua ligands (Fig. 2). Calcium ions are in two different coordination. In the first coordination, the calcium 1 atom is at the center of symmetry and is coordinated with four oxygen atoms coming from two different trimesic acid ligands and four oxygen atoms from the aqua ligands. In the second coordination, the calcium 2 atom is coordinated with five oxygen atoms from the aqua ligands and two oxygen atoms from two different trimesic acid ligands. Calcium ions and trimesic acid ligands form the [Ca2(TMA)2] metalloligand. The distance between the CaCa ions is 10.421 Å. Neighbor [Ca2(TMA)2] metalloligands combine with calcium ions and water molecules to form 3D coordination polymers (Fig. S4).

Details of data collection and crystal structure refinement parameters of complexes are given in Table 1 . Selected bond distances (Å) and angles (°) for complexes are given at supporting information (Tables S1–S8).

## Elemental analysis

The amount of carbon and hydrogen were determined using elemental analysis device and the amount of magnesium and calcium were obtained using ICP-MS. The results were shown in Table 2 . It was seen that the composition ratios obtained from the chemical analysis results were compatible with the chemical composition of the complexes.

## FTIR analysis

The considered FT-IR peaks of magnesium and calcium trimesate complexes synthesized by one-pot self-assembly reaction and ion exchange method were summarized in Table 3 and shown in Fig. S5. The most significant peaks are OH, asymmetric COO, symmetric COO and CO vibrational frequencies. The broad peak observed at 3600-3000 cm−1 is attributed to the hydrogen bonds for each complex. When the FT-IR spectra of complexes synthesized by different methods are compared, it is seen that there are band shifts. The change in the values indicates that synthesis method changed the observed complexes.

## Thermal analysis

The TGA curves of calcium and magnesium trimesate for both methods are shown in Fig. 3 . The total mass loss in magnesium trimesate synthesized by ion exchange method was 73.4%, while the total mass loss in magnesium trimesate synthesized by one-pot self-assembly reaction was found 68.8% at 1000 °C. Mass loss at 25–200 °C is due to the removal of coordinated and adsorbed water, mass loss at 200–700 °C is due to fragmentation and removal of the organic ligand. The remaining mass is the magnesium oxide compounds. The total mass loss in calcium trimesate synthesized by the one-pot self-assembly reaction was 53.55% while the total mass loss in the ion exchange method was 52.97% at 800 °C. It is seen that the thermal stability of the molecules obtained by both methods are similar. The first step mass loss is due to the removing of water in the structure and the second and third step loss are due to the decomposition of trimesate ligand with complete transformation into calcium oxides.

## Surface properties and hydrogen adsorption measurements

Nitrogen adsorption measurements of complexes were shown in Fig. 4 . The type of adsorption isotherms for each complexes are Type III which is classified by the IUPAC. Type III describe adsorption on macroporous adsorbents with strong and weak adsorbate-adsorbent interactions, respectively [33].

The BET surface area of magnesium trimesate synthesized by the one-pot self-assembly reaction is 2.30 m2/g and the BET surface area of magnesium trimesate synthesized by the ion exchange method is 5.69 m2/g. It appears that the surface area of magnesium trimesate synthesized by the ion exchange method is higher. The BET surface area of calcium trimesate synthesized by the one-pot self-assembly reaction is 1.36 m2/g and the BET surface area of calcium trimesate synthesized by the ion exchange method is 1.31 m2/g. The surface area of calcium trimesate synthesized by hydrothermal method is 1.58 m2/g [34]. As the synthesis method is changed, the changing crystal structure causes to change surface area.

Experimental hydrogen storage values were determined under 1 bar pressure and liquid nitrogen atmosphere to measure the hydrogen storage capacity of the complexes synthesized by two different methods. The theoretical hydrogen storage models were constructed by creating experimental conditions with crystal unit cell information of the synthesized molecule. The theoretical and experimental hydrogen storage capacity curves of the complexes are given in Fig. 5 . Experimental hydrogen storage capacity of magnesium trimesate was found to be 0.049% in one-pot self-assembly reaction and 0.054% in ion exchange method by mass at 77 K and 1 bar pressure. The first magnesium-based metal organic framework Mg3(NDC)3 (NDC = 2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylate) has 0.46 wt % hydrogen storage capacity [35]. The ionic radius of Mg is similar some of transition metals (Cu, Zn), but the molar mass of Mg is much smaller than these transition metals [36]. Magnesium based metal organic frameworks have a reduced framework density, low porosity and low hydrogen uptake capacities [37–39].

Experimental hydrogen storage capacity of calcium trimesate was found to be 0.066% in one-pot self-assembly reaction and 0.045% in ion exchange method by mass. While the complex structure synthesized by the ion exchange method differs from that of the complex synthesized by one-pot self-assembly reaction, the hydrogen storage capacities show similar behavior as the hydrogen storage spaces is closed by hydrogen bonds. The difference between the theoretical and the experimental hydrogen storage capacities is due to the low hydrogen storage performance. The high experimental value is due to the presence of non-crystallized parts in the bulk samples and provide more surface for gas storage.

## Conclusions

We have successfully synthesized four complexes. The C9H14MgO11.H2O complex was obtained using the one-pot self-assembly reaction and the C18H34Mg3O26.4H2O complex was obtained when the ion exchange method was used. The C9H12CaO10 complex was obtained using the one-pot self-assembly reaction and the C18H30Ca3O24 complex was obtained when the ion exchange method was used. This indicates that different crystals can be synthesized with changing synthesis method. Thermal behavior of complexes were investigated and thermal decomposition of complexes was started with dehydration and completed with decomposition of ligand. Experimental hydrogen storage capacity of magnesium trimesate was found to be 0.049% in one-pot self-assembly reaction and 0.054% in ion exchange method with 2.30 and 5.69 m2/g BET surface area. Experimental hydrogen storage capacity of calcium trimesate was found to be 0.066% in one-pot self-assembly reaction and 0.045% in ion exchange method by mass 1.36 and 1.31 m2/g BET surface area. Because of low surface areas and porosity, hydrogen storage capacities of complexes were found as low.

## Appendix ASupplementary data

The following is the supplementary data related to this article:

Crystallographic data of the complexes have been deposited with the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Center, CCDC No. 1480236, 1480234, 1480235 and 1481308. Copies of this information may be obtained free of charge from the Director, CCDC, 12 Union Road, Cambridge CB2 1EZ, UK (fax: +44-1223-336033; e-mail: deposit@ccdc.cam.ac.uk or www: http://www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk).mmc1 mmc1

## Supplementary data

Supplementary data related to this article can be found at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molstruc.2017.11.128.

### Crystal data and structure refinement parameters of complexes.

| Empirical formula | C9H14MgO11·H2O | C18H34Mg3O26·4H2O | C9H12CaO10 | C18H30Ca3O24 |
| Formula weight | 340.53 | 811.44 | 320.27 | 750.66 |
| Crystal system | Monoclinic | Triclinic | Monoclinic | Monoclinic |
| Space group | P21/c | P-1 | P21/c | C2/c |
| Color | colorless | colorless | colorless | colorless |
| a (Å) | 11.1394 (8) | 6.7591 (12) | 10.1977 (7) | 19.398 (8) |
| b (Å) | 18.3506 (15) | 10.746 (2) | 16.4581 (12) | 11.512 (4) |
| c (Å) | 7.0833 (5) | 23.998 (4) | 7.4796 (5) | 13.094 (5) |
| α (º) | – | 78.381 (4) | – | – |
| β (º) | 106.949 (2) | 85.611 (5) | 102.312 (2) | 106.372 (13) |
| γ (º) | – | 72.746 (5) | – | – |
| V (Å3) | 1385.04 (18) | 1630.3 (5) | 1226.46 (15) | 2805.5 (18) |
| Z | 4 | 2 | 4 | 4 |
| D c (g cm−3) | 1.633 | 1.653 | 1.734 | 1.777 |
| μ (mm−1) | 0.19 | 0.21 | 0.56 | 0.70 |
| θ range (º) | 3.0–28.3 | 3.0–28.4 | 3.1–28.3 | 3.4–28.2 |
| Measured refls. | 38948 | 26070 | 30468 | 35211 |
| Independent refls. | 3435 | 6142 | 3030 | 3498 |
| R int | 0.042 | 0.042 | 0.029 | 0.045 |
| S | 1.22 | 1.32 | 1.11 | 1.09 |
| R1/wR2 | 0.110/0.242 | 0.098/0.267 | 0.025/0.067 | 0.032/0.081 |
| Δρmax/Δρmin (eÅ−3) | 1.58/-0.66 | 1.90/-0.38 | 0.39/-0.20 | 0.40/-0.49 |


### Chemical composition of the complexes synthesized by one-pot self-assembly reaction and ion exchange method.

| Complex | MW g/mol | Chemical Composition Calc. (Exp.) (%) |
|---|---|---|
| C | H | Mg | Ca |
|---|---|---|---|
| One-pot Self-assembly ReactionC9H14MgO11.H2O | 340.53 | 31.72 (30.98) | 4.74(4.53) | 7.05(6.86) | – |
| Ion Exchange MethodC18H34Mg3O26.4H2O | 811.44 | 26.62(26.30) | 5.22(4.96) | 8.87(8.69) | – |
| One-pot Self-assembly ReactionC9H12CaO10 | 320.27 | 33.72(33.49) | 3.81(3.74) | – | 12.49(12.86) |
| Ion Exchange MethodC18H30Ca3O24 | 750.66 | 28.77(28.76) | 4.03(3.93) | – | 15.99(15.69) |


### The considered FT-IR peaks of complexes synthesized by one-pot self-assembly reaction and ion exchange method.

| Groups | One-pot Self-assembly reactionC9H14MgO11.H2O | Ion Exchange MethodC18H34Mg3O26.4H2O | One-pot Self-assembly reactionC9H12CaO10 | Ion Exchange MethodC18H30Ca3O24 |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| υO-H | 3600–3000 | 3600–3100 | 3600–3300 | 3600–3200 |
| υas-COO | 1621–1580 | 1618–1556 | 1615–1545 | 1620–1554 |
| υs-COO | 1437–1369 | 1436–1366 | 1446 | 1441 |
| υCO | 1670 | 1692 | 1705 | 1714 |


